Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so welcome back.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is the QR code for my lecture polls.
Um, that I'm using.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to take that down in a second.
Um, we don't have an attendance poll today on Fridays.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Before I go into what we're doing today.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I just want to go back to something that
yesterday and make you aware I made a mistake.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so I asked you, uh, where are we?
Uh, we were on the PC.
NOTE CONF
On the PC?
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I ask you what the middle one there is.
The second row is and said that is associativity.
NOTE CONF
Um, I have to say, I've only looked at the
last two items there.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the first equation sign, of course, isn't associativity, but
rather you're taking the A out of the whole thing
NOTE CONF
so that Commutativity.
That part.
NOTE CONF
It'll sort of both together.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, sorry.
I've only sort of glanced at it and thought, oh,
NOTE CONF
yeah.
Associativity.
NOTE CONF
Um, um, what's wrong there anyhow?
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Once we have that, where are we for today?
NOTE CONF
So here's one thing.
I'm going to start with something that sort of fits
NOTE CONF
in yesterday.
Um, but we've got to go back to that, make
NOTE CONF
it slightly lighter.
And, um, it is a relatively important application of matrix
NOTE CONF
vector multiplication that we've done yesterday.
Um, so I remind you that we're talking about functions.
NOTE CONF
Um, so functions is something that you've seen as a
function from R to R from mapping numbers into numbers.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so you just you just basically function as a
rule.
NOTE CONF
You have an input, you have a rule, and then
you have an output.
NOTE CONF
So I could have for example x squared.
Uh, so here's my rule square the input um, and
NOTE CONF
I write this down as f of x, you know.
Um, but you can obviously do something like that to
NOTE CONF
anything.
We can do something like that to for vectors, uh,
NOTE CONF
where we have also rules how to transform a vector
into somebody else and something else we tend to call
NOTE CONF
this transformations here.
Uh, to some extent it's interchanged with the name with
NOTE CONF
functions.
So that is really it.
NOTE CONF
But think about a transformation as a function applied to
a vector.
NOTE CONF
So something that I can do to transform a vector.
For example I could use the matrix as that yesterday
NOTE CONF
um and do a matrix vector product.
So I could say if I've got the vector X1X2
NOTE CONF
here, I could transform it into the vector that I'm
getting by multiplying this vector with the matrix from the
NOTE CONF
left.
You know, um, so I can work this out.
NOTE CONF
We've done that.
Um, and we can write this again as a transformation.
NOTE CONF
So I can say in this case, t of x
T for transformation rather than f of functions is defined
NOTE CONF
by of a vector, x is defined by axe.
Um, and quite often we use a notation just to
NOTE CONF
indicate that this T with a subscript a, and we
call this the transformation that is induced by a matrix.
NOTE CONF
And this is actually very, very important application of matrices.
You can think about matrices actually as transformations to some
NOTE CONF
extent.
There's a certain equivalence there.
NOTE CONF
We'll come to that quite a bit later.
So I said here we call this or typically call
NOTE CONF
this to of x.
But remember the Ta is really just a name a
NOTE CONF
label that we put to that.
Yeah we could call it anything else we like.
NOTE CONF
And it's the transformation induced by a.
So that's an important concept that keeps coming up throughout
NOTE CONF
this course.
Um, and the reason I'm doing this here is because
NOTE CONF
it will come up once we do matrix matrix multiplication,
um, and matrix inverses.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's quite often um, um, if there's duality or
thinking about what is the matrix, what are the properties
NOTE CONF
of the matrix.
And on the other hand, very closely related to that
NOTE CONF
is thinking about what is the transformation induced by the
matrix and what are the properties of this transformation.
NOTE CONF
So let's start um, I've got here, so I'll start
with a poll and saying I've got a matrix given
NOTE CONF
up there, which is relatively simple, almost the identity.
And what is the transformation like geometrically, what happens to
NOTE CONF
a vector in R2 space.
Um, if I multiply that by that matrix there.
NOTE CONF
Um, and let me just go quickly onto my.
So you've got my ruler pole there.
NOTE CONF
Um, remember that was it.
And I just need to go, uh, reset this from
NOTE CONF
yesterday and display it.
So do you see that?
NOTE CONF
You do see that.
And somebody's answering.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
All right.
The results.
NOTE CONF
All right.
See if we can get a few more.
NOTE CONF
Uh, about 15 seconds left.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Time's up.
NOTE CONF
And so vast majority says that this reflection on the
y axis.
NOTE CONF
And indeed it is.
Um, and just to, um, for completeness, um, I think
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to go through this.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Uh, go through this in detail.
So if I have, um, let's work this out.
NOTE CONF
What is minus one 001 times X1X2.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You don't see anything?
NOTE CONF
Uh, there we go.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, so I can work out what happens here.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is if you do the matrix vector
multiplication, this is a minus x one and x two.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so in other words, um, if I've got a
sort of vector here, um, I'm going to leave the
NOTE CONF
x2 component intact.
And the x1 component, I'm going to flip around the
NOTE CONF
y axis.
Uh, so it is a reflection on the y axis.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So in a simple example like that you can just
NOTE CONF
do that by sort of just working out what it
is and then thinking what is this dramatically.
NOTE CONF
Um, once it gets more complicated and higher dimensions, obviously
more difficult.
NOTE CONF
But we were quite a few of the things we're
doing here.
NOTE CONF
We deriving in the course will help you then to
classify pretty much any matrix into the sort of transformation
NOTE CONF
geometrically, that it induces.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, that was just, I said just hanging on
from yesterday a little bit.
NOTE CONF
Now get into, um, the matrix matrix multiplication.
So, um, assuming we've now got two matrices A is
NOTE CONF
M times n, b is n times k.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
And I say a little bit something about the dimensions.
Um, and so we know how to do um, how
NOTE CONF
to do matrix vector multiplication.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we're just applying this Here.
We use pretty much the same trick as we've done
NOTE CONF
yesterday.
This matrix B that we now want to multiply.
NOTE CONF
What were we saying a times b.
So we divide this up into its columns b1 b2
NOTE CONF
b k.
And now we're saying that the product a times b
NOTE CONF
is simply that we multiply the matrix A here with
every vector with every sort of column of the matrix
NOTE CONF
B or the other way round.
We take every column of the matrix B in turn,
NOTE CONF
multiply that with a, and then put them all together
in a new matrix.
NOTE CONF
So that is the matrix matrix product.
Again general principle we know how to do something something
NOTE CONF
more extended.
We'll try to we try to use what we know
NOTE CONF
in the new definition.
So what's the size of what we've got here.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this new matrix A times B, um, in
terms of, uh, rows and column dimensions, what is the
NOTE CONF
size?
Um, I'm just going to do that by asking somebody
NOTE CONF
if you've got an idea rather than a poll here.
Right.
NOTE CONF
M times K yes, that is correct.
Uh, I'm not going to go through sort of working
NOTE CONF
that out.
I'm just going to give you the common rule or
NOTE CONF
rule of thumb or memory aid for that.
So if you've got an M times n matrix like
NOTE CONF
a here, uh, that you're multiplying with an n times
k matrix like B here.
NOTE CONF
Um, then in order for that to work the multiplication,
the middle dimensions here have to match.
NOTE CONF
And then it basically cancels them out and you're left
with the with the two n dimension.
NOTE CONF
So that's quite useful.
And another reason why this rows before columns is, is
NOTE CONF
quite sensible, right?
I'll show you that for everybody else.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, now, this is to some extent arbitrary.
NOTE CONF
So you might ask, um, this is relatively complicated.
I mean, apart from saying we know matrix vector multiplication,
NOTE CONF
we try to use it again, matrix addition we've just
done component wise.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So why why do we not just the matrix multiplication
NOTE CONF
component wise?
Um, and the answer is um, we could do um,
NOTE CONF
I mean, of course, nothing nothing prevents us from doing
that.
NOTE CONF
And we could see whether that is useful.
Um, it just turns out that this way of doing
NOTE CONF
matrix matrix multiplication is very useful.
And again, we will see, um, during the time of
NOTE CONF
this course of what it is indeed useful for.
Um, it's not obvious.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's been sort of suggested that this, that this
is what we should do relatively recently, now and then
NOTE CONF
people have worked that out But it raises sort of
I think an interesting question is, like our mathematicians, what
NOTE CONF
do we do?
Do we discover things or do we invent things?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So it's all the mathematics out there just for us
NOTE CONF
to to uncover it or are we actively inventing stuff?
And I think this very much shows we are actively
NOTE CONF
inventing stuff that might be useful.
It's not obvious that you have to do matrix matrix
NOTE CONF
multiplication that way.
It's just somebody suggested it turns out to be useful.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So once we've got that, I've got a number of
NOTE CONF
poles here.
I won't do all of them.
NOTE CONF
I'll have a selection.
I think I won't do that one there.
NOTE CONF
I would quite like to do this one here.
So we've seen these matrices yesterday.
NOTE CONF
Um, and ask whether I can add them together.
Uh, turns out none of them can, but we can
NOTE CONF
multiply quite a few of them together.
So I'd like to know what you think.
NOTE CONF
Which of these a, b, d down to e?
Which of these possibilities which of the matrices canyon will
NOTE CONF
deploy it, which you can't because it quite need to
check a couple of things.
NOTE CONF
There is a bit more complicated.
I'm going to give you two minutes for this poll.
NOTE CONF
So and I do need five choices now.
So just reset this in case it hadn't been.
NOTE CONF
And then I'll give you a five choices poll now
on the laptop that should appear there in a second
NOTE CONF
hold.
Wait wait wait wait wait I did say five.
NOTE CONF
What I did say two minutes.
I will give you two minutes.
NOTE CONF
I just have to reset the timer once it's time
down.
NOTE CONF
Um.
And another minute.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So almost up.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Eh.
NOTE CONF
And quite a few.
None of them.
NOTE CONF
Um, the other only half a little bit.
So a is correct.
NOTE CONF
Indeed.
Um, so all of them, I, um, I tend to
NOTE CONF
think that, um, in order to check that, I sort
of take a column of the second matrix, say a,
NOTE CONF
that's got three elements, and see if I can sort
of like the matrix vector multiplication, turn its on its
NOTE CONF
side and put it over the top of the other
matrix.
NOTE CONF
So BA that works.
D has three dimensions that I can put that on
NOTE CONF
top of C.
C has just one dimension.
NOTE CONF
The columns.
But I can put that on top of D.
NOTE CONF
And then C has one and A has three dimensional.
I can put that on top of C.
NOTE CONF
So A does indeed work, but sort of get into
the habit of checking whether these things work.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so yeah.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
No, I think I've deleted the other one that I
didn't have.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so this is an interesting one, actually.
Um, so assuming that you've got, you've got matrices and
NOTE CONF
all these, the dimensions match that all these products work
and you've got a b equal to c b.
NOTE CONF
Well, if this was numbers you'd be sort of cancelling
the b out as long as it's not equal to
NOTE CONF
zero.
Uh, we have not equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
Does this work here?
Am I right?
NOTE CONF
For choices and it's life.
Ha ha ha ha!
NOTE CONF
Now, this looks very, very interesting.
Pretty much equally divided between all of those options.
NOTE CONF
So can I, um.
This is actually complicated because there isn't a direct answer.
NOTE CONF
It depends a little bit on how you understand the
question.
NOTE CONF
So who who says somebody who says this is true.
Can you give me can somebody give me an argument
NOTE CONF
why this is true?
I've seen you first.
NOTE CONF
Multiply both sides by b minus one.
You will end up paying me then.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
NOTE CONF
That is exactly the answer that I was looking for.
So if you multiply both sides by b minus one
NOTE CONF
by b inverse, uh, you can derive that.
And indeed that's true.
NOTE CONF
Um, let me just, uh, quickly show you that.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Got too many pens here.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if I start with something like if I
start with a B equals to CB.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, there we go.
NOTE CONF
Like this a little bit bigger, right?
And, uh, so I can multiply this if I half
NOTE CONF
b minus one here, I can multiply both from the
left on both sides.
NOTE CONF
So I can do a b b minus one equals
to c b b minus one.
NOTE CONF
Um and okay I mean I need to think about
the order there.
NOTE CONF
But that is associative.
And I have here b b minus one.
NOTE CONF
That just gives us an identity.
So this is a identity equals to see identity.
NOTE CONF
And then we see multiplying anything with the identity keeps
the identity.
NOTE CONF
So this is a equals to c.
Um right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah that's that's okay.
But it only works if you have B inverse.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
You need to have B inverse for that.
NOTE CONF
We only have given b is not equal to zero.
And that's not the same thing.
NOTE CONF
Indeed for a lot of these things if you if
you have stuff like that, something that works in real
NOTE CONF
numbers under the condition that B equals is not equal
to zero.
NOTE CONF
Typically it works for matrices under the condition that that
matrix is invertible rather than not equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
That is the condition that you need.
But it doesn't always work.
NOTE CONF
And I was wondering whether anybody of those that are
thought and they're certain have a counterexample.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you've got your.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
It's coming true.
There isn't always an inverse to matrix.
NOTE CONF
No.
Chips and.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't work.
But I mean, this argument doesn't work all the time.
NOTE CONF
But the question is, it might just be true anyhow
or without the argument.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you have an example matrix.
With the rows 1101.
NOTE CONF
As.
A1101.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
The 0001.
NOTE CONF
And if I do that out I'll get 0101.
Yep okay.
NOTE CONF
Instead if I use see if I use a say
2111.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Which matrix?
NOTE CONF
The first.
122111.
NOTE CONF
And keep be the same.
I still get 010 on.
NOTE CONF
The wrong pen here.
So this is zero.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is one.
This is zero.
NOTE CONF
This one seems to work.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good, good, good.
Excellent, excellent.
NOTE CONF
Um, I.
All right.
NOTE CONF
I didn't see that one immediately.
Um, although.
NOTE CONF
So the zero is here.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
No, no, you're right, you're right, you're right.
Um.
NOTE CONF
The zero one in the second column will be kind
of extracts the second column.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And C.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So it's just so it's a bit, it's a bit
like, um.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's take it.
Let's take this example.
NOTE CONF
I think the point I was going to make, you
can actually see from your example just as well.
NOTE CONF
So the first column there of zeros here just maps
everything to zero.
NOTE CONF
Doesn't really matter what you're doing.
Um, and as you said, the second column there, the
NOTE CONF
zero one that you have there will just extract the
second column from the first matrix.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So it doesn't matter what you put in the first
NOTE CONF
column there.
You could have put anything there.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So, um, what you effectively doing by multiplying with another
NOTE CONF
matrix?
If it's not invertible, you're losing information that is not
NOTE CONF
able to reconstruct again.
So that's why something like that doesn't always work.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Good, good.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's a bit like I don't think I want
to do that.
NOTE CONF
I think I'll actually want to go on a little
bit.
NOTE CONF
I think I want to do this one here.
So matrix matrix multiplication we said.
NOTE CONF
And that's why I've done it.
We can think of a matrix or matrix vector multiplication
NOTE CONF
as being a transformation.
There's some sort of equivalence.
NOTE CONF
Now what is a matrix?
Matrix multiplication.
NOTE CONF
That is equivalent to some sense.
Or that means in some sense that we're chaining to
NOTE CONF
transformations.
So if you've got the matrix A here we say
NOTE CONF
to is the transformation that is induced by it.
And we've got another matrix B.
NOTE CONF
And we say TB is the transformation induced by that.
So what transformation will be induced by a b.
NOTE CONF
And I've just given those transformations there in a slightly
obscure notation.
NOTE CONF
You have two choices.
And I just need to get a two choices.
NOTE CONF
This is just there's just two choices.
You're not true or false.
NOTE CONF
Two choices are good eight.
We got a bit longer to think about.
NOTE CONF
This reset this one reset to choices?
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't give me a timer.
I have to do this manually.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Right?
NOTE CONF
10s.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, just a few more coming in.
Let's have a look at the results.
NOTE CONF
So.
Okay, this is interesting.
NOTE CONF
The majority thinks B.
Actually, a is correct.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's not much I can give you to do
that.
NOTE CONF
It's just.
You are right.
NOTE CONF
There's something confusing there.
At some point, the thing that looks the other way
NOTE CONF
round than what you think.
But it's not this.
NOTE CONF
So just to just to recapture what is going on
here.
NOTE CONF
So I mean, to some extent it's just obscure notation.
You know, the question is I've got this to train
NOTE CONF
with TB applied to X, what do we actually mean
by that.
NOTE CONF
And TR trained by TB.
What we actually mean by that is simply that we
NOTE CONF
say this is to of t a of TB of
x.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um so that's, that's simply what it is to of
NOTE CONF
TB of x.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And then if I have a vector x.
So that means if I evaluate this I first of
NOTE CONF
all apply the matrix and multiply by the matrix B
from the left.
NOTE CONF
And then I multiply with a matrix A from the
left.
NOTE CONF
So this gives me a b x.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So that's the transformation induced by that.
Um now the thing where it does become confusing is
NOTE CONF
that you think so what does this what does this
do.
NOTE CONF
So I've got to make a vector x here.
Um, so if I do want to evaluate this to
NOTE CONF
of TB of x, I'm actually evaluating from the middle
outside.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So I'm not doing first hire and then TB.
NOTE CONF
I'm doing first TB and then to.
So I first of all applying TB to this here.
NOTE CONF
Um so this will give me the matrix B x
here.
NOTE CONF
Um and I think what we've had here, this was
living in our case space, uh, this is living in
NOTE CONF
MB space.
And then I'm doing the TR transformation here.
NOTE CONF
Um, that now will give me a b x.
Um, this is living in r n space.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I can do everything at the same time
here and this transformation here.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to call to change with TB.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, but.
NOTE CONF
Uh, how does TB map X from.
K to M.
NOTE CONF
So b is an n times k matrix.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So I have to multiply the k vector.
And it would give me an n vector.
NOTE CONF
And I've done right.
I've got my M's and the ends the wrong way
NOTE CONF
round.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
All right okay.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
You're right.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the confusing thing was something like that.
NOTE CONF
Is this operation.
If I see if I see a B times X
NOTE CONF
or to apply to TB of x, which operation do
I do first?
NOTE CONF
Well, um, that's the thing that you have to think
about, um, how this works.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So there is sort of matrix matrix multiplication.
NOTE CONF
Um, the other big topic that we're doing today is
inverses.
NOTE CONF
Um, and give you a little bit of a motivation.
I'll just put this on both sides that, um.
NOTE CONF
You all see this?
Um, I am there.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, if I had an equation like that, a
x equals to B for an A, which isn't equal
NOTE CONF
to zero.
Um, in numbers, what would you do?
NOTE CONF
You know, divide divide by a.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You just divide by a.
So I would just say I can divide through by
NOTE CONF
a and then I get x equals to b over
a.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Now we've seen that a linear system of equations um
NOTE CONF
something like that.
We've seen yesterday that we can write this in this
NOTE CONF
form axe equals to b which formally looks the same
as we've got there.
NOTE CONF
Um, so how do we do proceed there.
Now, um, if we divide by a.
NOTE CONF
Times the inverse.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So very important.
You never divide by a Via matrix.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Just never.
NOTE CONF
Even if you think while dividing by a matrix is
the same thing as having an inverse.
NOTE CONF
And we do have inverses, just don't.
Um, and the reason is simple.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So if I write, if I were to write something
NOTE CONF
like, uh, in this case this is the other way
round B divided by a.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And I say, oh, well, this is the same by
NOTE CONF
multiplying by an inverse.
Well, what do I mean.
NOTE CONF
Is this b minus one times a or is this
a times b minus one.
NOTE CONF
Well uh, those in general are not the same thing.
Matrix.
NOTE CONF
Matrix multiplication doesn't commute, so those are not the same
thing.
NOTE CONF
I have to decide what I want, what I want
this to mean.
NOTE CONF
And that's why this this one would be ambiguous.
Um, I wouldn't know what it means.
NOTE CONF
So don't don't do that here.
Um, Always decide on one of those two.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you need to do something like, um, like
dividing by a matrix.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So, um, back to where we were.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, so we can't divide three by a, we have
NOTE CONF
to use inverses instead.
Um, so, um, just back to the drawing board, but,
NOTE CONF
uh, the answer, the right answer already came from there.
Um, so in real numbers, rather than dividing through by
NOTE CONF
a, we can of course multiply by the inverse by
the reciprocal there.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we can do the same thing in linear
systems.
NOTE CONF
So um, what does this mean.
Um, I'll do it this way round.
NOTE CONF
Same thing.
We've got a linear system.
NOTE CONF
We realised we can write this as a matrix vector
equation there.
NOTE CONF
Um, we say we can multiply by a minus one.
So, um, let's just have a look at this matrix
NOTE CONF
here.
You know, And try to work out what this is.
NOTE CONF
So what is B times a?
And I probably before I do this here in just
NOTE CONF
three I'll give you a couple of seconds.
Really.
NOTE CONF
Well I'm not doing anything where you can do this
in your head or write this down and just check.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Anybody has got an answer.
It's the identity.
NOTE CONF
Matrix.
It is the identity matrix, indeed.
NOTE CONF
So let's just check a few things.
So first element here I'd have to use that column
NOTE CONF
and that row and take the take the scalar product.
So three times five is 15 two times two is
NOTE CONF
four.
That is 19 together divided by 19 is one.
NOTE CONF
Uh next one here minus two times five plus plus
two times five is zero.
NOTE CONF
And the others work the same.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So I've got zero one.
So indeed this is the identity matrix.
NOTE CONF
Um so so this is the inverse.
I'll come to that in a, I come to that
NOTE CONF
in a second.
Um, strictly speaking actually at the moment, our definition of
NOTE CONF
inverse, I think I have that in a couple of
slides.
NOTE CONF
But the definition of inverse that we had so far,
uh, required us to do A times B as well
NOTE CONF
and check that one, that that also gives the identity.
Just to make you aware, I'm not doing that at
NOTE CONF
the moment.
I'll have a justification for that later.
NOTE CONF
Um, but if I have this matrix B now, what
I can do is if I want to solve axe
NOTE CONF
equals to B, I can multiply everything from the left
by b, um, and then realise that the left hand
NOTE CONF
side of what I've written there, um, b times axe
I can, I can use associativity, I can move the
NOTE CONF
brackets, that is ba times x b a.
I've just worked out as the identity.
NOTE CONF
So that's the identity matrix.
It is x.
NOTE CONF
So I've got a formula there.
Yeah I've got a formula.
NOTE CONF
Um I know that a x is equal to b.
Um so I've got a formula that x equals b
NOTE CONF
times the right hand side of my system now.
So I can now go and just work this out
NOTE CONF
here.
Um, the matrix vector multiplication and multiplication by this scalar
NOTE CONF
there.
And that gives me x equals one one.
NOTE CONF
Um, so what I've just done is I solve this
system of equations without using Gaussian elimination.
NOTE CONF
That bit surprise you.
Uh, thing, of course, is that I've made up this
NOTE CONF
matrix B there, um, which are sort of.
Well, you've read in in Nicholson.
NOTE CONF
I haven't told you how to find that, but of
course you do find it through Gaussian elimination.
NOTE CONF
So, um, it's, um, you haven't really won anything.
It's just an interesting observation.
NOTE CONF
If you have an inverse.
Uh, you don't have to do Gaussian elimination.
NOTE CONF
You can just solve the system, um, by multiplying it.
Um, okay, so I think I've got a definition here.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, we have this.
So a matrix is an inverse.
NOTE CONF
If we have able to um, both BA and a,
b are equal to the identity matrix, um, then it's
NOTE CONF
called an invertible matrix.
I denote this by minus one.
NOTE CONF
Um, and just to remind you, you might be used
that for numbers.
NOTE CONF
If I have a minus one, that's just another way
of writing one over a in this case don't divide
NOTE CONF
by matrices.
So um, do not write that.
NOTE CONF
Um, yes.
And indeed what we have there is the inverse, um,
NOTE CONF
this matrix P that we had earlier was the inverse.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So just a couple of things on inverses that I
had before, I sort of go back to doing something,
NOTE CONF
uh, for a few matrices.
We just know the inverse.
NOTE CONF
For example, if you have a diagonal matrix, um, we
can just invert every element on the diagonal and that
NOTE CONF
gives us the inverse.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
This strictly only works for diagonal matrices.
If you've got any off diagonal elements.
NOTE CONF
Um, that doesn't work anymore.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, also for 2 or 3 matrices, Is there an
explicit formula.
NOTE CONF
And you will see if I have if you have
a look at my my b there, my A there,
NOTE CONF
you will see that this is one over 19.
And swapping the elements about a little bit is exactly
NOTE CONF
what comes out of this formula here.
I have to say, I don't remember that formula.
NOTE CONF
I know that it exists forever.
Knitted.
NOTE CONF
I look it up.
There are corresponding formulae for higher dimensions, but they get
NOTE CONF
pretty unwieldy.
Um, so tend to not to be used.
NOTE CONF
I should point out this thing in the denominator.
There is.
NOTE CONF
You will later see this is called the determinant of
the matrix a um, it's a very useful thing.
NOTE CONF
And what it is, what it does determine is indeed
whether a matrix is invertible or not.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, and the determinant, unlike this formula, the determinant is
NOTE CONF
very useful in higher dimensions.
And also having it as a criteria of whether a
NOTE CONF
matrix is invertible or not.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what can go wrong?
NOTE CONF
Um, so I'm claiming this matrix T is not invertible.
Um, and I do this in the following manner.
NOTE CONF
They say let's calculate those two matrix vector products there.
And again while I'll write down here um I'll do
NOTE CONF
this.
Do this together with you while I write down the
NOTE CONF
stuff.
Um, here, I encourage you to try to work this
NOTE CONF
out.
Um, yourself.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, uh.
Anybody got an answer?
NOTE CONF
714.
Yes, that's what I got.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then for the next one, let's do this
together.
NOTE CONF
Uh, minus two and three times one, three.
So this is a minus two plus three.
NOTE CONF
Three.
Uh, that's a seven.
NOTE CONF
And this is a minus four plus 18.
This is also a 14.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
So.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In view of that.
Uh, what then is the solution to this system of
NOTE CONF
equations?
Hmm.
NOTE CONF
Two answers.
Actually, not just two answers.
NOTE CONF
You'll know from what you've done last week that if
you've got two answers, you've got infinite, infinitely many.
NOTE CONF
So any combination of those two will also be an
answer.
NOTE CONF
But we have several answers.
Now, if this here where an invertible matrix, if we
NOTE CONF
did have an A minus one, we could just write
down the solution to the system as a minus one
NOTE CONF
times b.
So that would just give us a single answer.
NOTE CONF
But we have two answers.
So by contradiction this cannot be an invertible matrix that
NOTE CONF
we have out there.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let me just check.
I've got ten minutes or so.
NOTE CONF
Where am I and what did I want to do.
Um, and what was important to do.
NOTE CONF
No, I think we're pretty much we're good on time.
We're very good on time, I think so, of course.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
In order to check, I should say that in order
NOTE CONF
to check whether it's invertible or not, you can have
a look at this determinant.
NOTE CONF
Um, a times D is six and b times C
is also six.
NOTE CONF
So determinant is zero.
This is not an invertible matrix.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Right I might as well give you that one here
a Po.
NOTE CONF
So if I've got an invertible matrix and a scalar
which is not equal to zero, so it's k is
NOTE CONF
the scalar times k, is that invertible.
True or false.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Ten.
NOTE CONF
Oh, I haven't given you.
I haven't shown you the poll.
NOTE CONF
What is that?
Is counting down.
NOTE CONF
Um.
It's a bit late.
NOTE CONF
I think you've seen the countdown on your app or,
um.
NOTE CONF
So we've got.
It's Count it down.
NOTE CONF
Results are the vast majority think it is true.
And in this case, that is true.
NOTE CONF
There's no trick question here involved.
Uh, I can just say one over k times a
NOTE CONF
minus one.
Um, that is the inverse.
NOTE CONF
You can check it by multiplying things together and see
whether that works.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so I'm not I do this in a second.
I'll do this.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I've got a couple of properties.
An inverse is unique if it exists, the identity itself.
NOTE CONF
Invert.
These two are quite useful as calculations rule.
NOTE CONF
If I have a product a times P and invert
that, I have to change the order of the matrices.
NOTE CONF
Um, same as we've had for transposition.
Um, and again, same as for transposition.
NOTE CONF
If I take the inverse and invert that again, I'll
get my original matrix back.
NOTE CONF
Just to summarise that.
Now Nicholson then has this monster theorem there, the inverse
NOTE CONF
theorem 2.4.5.
Um, and if you skip that because it just looks
NOTE CONF
too long.
I encourage you to really do look at it because
NOTE CONF
this is very, very useful.
Now, um, so it'll tell us, I want to say
NOTE CONF
two things about it.
Tell us a few things that are equivalent.
NOTE CONF
Um, so what does it mean that a matrix is
invertible?
NOTE CONF
It means, for example, that a homogeneous system has only
a unique solution, which is the trivial solution.
NOTE CONF
Um, it also tells us I'll go to for first,
um, that any system of equations with that matrix has
NOTE CONF
at least one solution, no matter what the right hand
side is.
NOTE CONF
So, um, it tells us under three that we can
carry the matrix to the identity matrix for elementary row
NOTE CONF
operations.
Um, we've seen that that because the rank in that
NOTE CONF
case, if it's the identity of the row operations that
has rank N, so it's a full rank matrix.
NOTE CONF
Um, and it says the existing matrix such as AC
is I n that a times C is the identity.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So the thing that I want to, as I say,
NOTE CONF
these things are very useful to, to have in mind
and indeed will later get another inverse theorem.
NOTE CONF
I want to point out the way that Nicholson proves
this is quite, is quite, um, interesting because it says
NOTE CONF
everything of this is equivalent.
And he proves that by saying from one follows, two
NOTE CONF
from two follows, three from 3 or 4 from 4
or 5, and then from five follows one to complete
NOTE CONF
the circle.
And if you proved all of that, you can pretty
NOTE CONF
much go from anything to anything else.
So it's an interesting and useful proof technique to keep
NOTE CONF
that in mind.
I encourage you to look through all of them.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um, I just want to point out the step
NOTE CONF
from 5 to 1.
So we've got a matrix that AC that we've got
NOTE CONF
a matrix C and we know A times C is
the the the the identity matrix.
NOTE CONF
Why do we still need to prove that then A
is invertible.
NOTE CONF
Is that not the same thing.
What remains to be proven there.
NOTE CONF
Somewhere in the middle there is.
You have to prove that C times.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Invert from what we've had so far about identity would
NOTE CONF
have to move proof the other direction as well.
Now this tells us it's part of the equivalent.
NOTE CONF
So this theorem tells us actually we don't have to
do the other direction.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It comes for free.
NOTE CONF
So that's that's interesting.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the last thing I want to do, what I
skipped over here is, um, how do we get inverses?
NOTE CONF
Um, and I think this is from Nicholson.
Um, so it's a matrix inversion algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Rather than explaining that, then slide to you.
Um, I will just, um, quickly show you on the
NOTE CONF
visualiser.
And I'm not going to do the full example, um,
NOTE CONF
on the reading quest on Monday.
Um, if you look through, I do work on a
NOTE CONF
video through the full example, but if I want to
find an inverse of a matrix, say, um, the matrix
NOTE CONF
that I had earlier, where where did I have that?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, right.
Well, my.
NOTE CONF
Matrices, if I.
Want them.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Uh, so we have this matrix A that we had,
NOTE CONF
it was three minus two, two five.
Uh, there we go.
NOTE CONF
So if I want to have the inverse of that,
uh, what I do is I do Gaussian elimination and
NOTE CONF
I do Gaussian elimination with two right hand side.
So I'm just using one zero.
NOTE CONF
But I also use zero one.
Um, other words on the right hand side I just
NOTE CONF
put the identity matrix in the correct dimension.
Um, and then I go through Gaussian elimination and I
NOTE CONF
go through a glass formation trying to get this to
reduce excellent form.
NOTE CONF
And I've just known that if I've got reduced, if
this is an invertible matrix, my reduced reduced row echelon
NOTE CONF
form is actually the identity will look like that.
And this one will just end up being a minus
NOTE CONF
one here.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, and that might look like pure magic to you
at the moment.
NOTE CONF
Um, I will go into quite a bit detail why
that works next week.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you think about.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, no, I just make this thing.
NOTE CONF
If you think about what we're doing here.
So a times B, we want a half as equal
NOTE CONF
to the identity.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Uh, now we defined A times B as this being
a times the first column of a times a times
NOTE CONF
this the or the other columns of B by doing
that matrix in that way.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, and if we, um, if this would be equal
NOTE CONF
to the identity.
The identity.
NOTE CONF
We can also take apart into its columns.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So this is exactly what we've done there.
So what we're doing here, we really need to just
NOTE CONF
solve n linear systems of equations to find the identity.
And that is exactly, uh, what this thing here is
NOTE CONF
doing.
So as I say on the on the reading quiz
NOTE CONF
on Monday, I work, I think, through three by three
examples in detail and we will get next week much
NOTE CONF
more sort of insight of how these things work and
why they work.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's it for today.
Oh, I should say somebody came in and said, can
NOTE CONF
you please leave through that door?
Uh, that because in order for some fire regulations or
NOTE CONF
so, uh, that has stairs, if you don't fancy the
stairs for some reason to go up there.
NOTE CONF